## Regularization explained to my non-technical friend

<p>I want to start with why do we need regularization? so in linear regression we get the best fit line, which will comes if we have enough data to get the best fit line. so when you do not have enough data, let say you have only two training data points, the best fit line will be connecting two data points (which will overfit the training data). and when you do the prediction on testing data you might not get the correct predictions because of the overfitting of training data. This the place where regulariztion comes into picture. </p>

<p>So now when you do not have sufficient data to get the best fit line, how do you get the best-fit line? When you overfit the data what happens is you have less bias (because you are connecting the two training data points considering you have only two data points). when you predict on the testing data your predictions will be off. because of the variance is high. (variance meaning how your predictions vary from dataset to dataset). Now, what you have to do is, you do not overfit the data and increase bias (best-fit line wont connect two data points exactly) and when you predict on the test data set you will get the better predicted value and (because of the bias increment, your variance between dataset to dataset will be less) as you have less variance across datasets. if you see here, we are trading bias for better or low variance across datasets.</p>

<p>Penalizing bigger weights helps as we have seen in the linear regression like when we square the residuals if the residual is more and it will impact more because we are squaring it. This helps in a way like, if you are calculating or predicting wrong, because of squaring it the wrong prediction will be squared and it make the best-fit line worse by increasing mse. if the residue is less wrong, even if you square it, it will have less impact, the same stratergy is applicable here.</p>

<p>In the Ridge regression, what happens is that when you have more than one parameter are there to predict the best-fit line, then you square each weight and then resultant you multiply with λ, so that it will minimizes the prediction error and making training data to less overfit.</p>

<p>In the lasso regression, the same thing will happen but except that in the Ridge regression there are certain parameters which can not be helpful for predicting certain target variable. suppose if you are predicting the mice height from the feature set weight, age and astrology_score. so when you consider this example, in ridge regression what happens is that it will square all parameters like weight, age and astrology_score into consideration while predicting the height(eventhough considering astrology_score does not make any sense.) But in Lasso regression, you can ignore the parameters or weights which does not make any sense in predicting the targeted variable. This is the difference between Ridge and Lasso regression. Ridge and Lasso regression having their own pros and cons in their own respective area and we have to choose them based on our own need. If you take the above example, which i have explained above in mice prediction, if you choose Lasso regression it makes sense because considering astrology_score in prediction does not make any sense. so we want to eleminate the astrology_score. It will make sense when you have all parameters make sense while predicting the target variable then considering Ridge regression make sense because even if you remove or eliminate one variablev your predictions will be not accurate.</p>

<p>When the data is having the different features in the dataset, and when we are predicting the targeted variable, All the features needs to be standardized because each feature will represent in different unit. so for example, if you have house value prediction based on feature income, no_of_bedRooms, areainsqft, if you see the all the features represent in different unit. when you do not do standardization, let say income represent in lakhs, no_of_bedRooms will be represented in integer which will not move mostly more than 5, and you can not present income lakhs unit for bedrooms, so it has to standardized so that unit for each feature will be presented in standard unit</p>

<p>There are limitations for the regularization or sometimes it does not help. so let say when the data is underfit the model regularization does not help. Sometimes regularization will not be helpful when there are more colinear features in dataset and regularization may become unstable. and regularization will not helpful or work when you do not choose correct λ value. These are some of the scenarios where regularization does not help.</p>
